#summary Draft implementation plan of Raspy Juice bootloader.

= Introduction =

Raspy Juice is an experimental expansion board with an AVR ATmega168A microcontroller (MCU) to provide the services of controlling 4 channels of RC servo outputs, an RS485 interface, and a half-duplex software-based RS232 interface. The MCU itself is interfaced to the host computer through an I2C/TWI interface, in which the former is a slave device. 

The MCU itself has to programmed (flashed) with a firmware application so that the above services are operational. For the purpose of developing this firmware, the initial method of flashing the MCU is by using an _AVR Programmer_ with a 6-pin ICSP (in-circuit serial programming) header. However, this is inconvenient for users who do not own such a programming adapter. Also, it is foreseen that future updates of the firmware will need a means of being flashed into the MCU without the use of a programming adapter.

A _bootloader_ is a tiny firmware application that runs on the MCU when it is powered-up, before the main application takes over. The role of the bootloader is to check for certain conditions and decide if the MCU should be upgraded. If it is to be upgraded, the bootloader will wait for commands/data from the host computer and flash this new information into the MCU. This bootloader can be developed to use the I2C/TWI interface to the host computer to receive its commands/data.

This *_draft_* document is to plan for the development of this bootloader if necessary.

= Details =

==== Summary of quick searches of AVR I2C/TWI bootloaders ====

  * [http://www.atmel.com/Images/doc8079.pdf Atmel AVR112: TWI Bootloader for devices without boot section]
  * [http://www.atmel.com/Images/doc8435.pdf Atmel AVR1327: Two Wire Interface (TWI) Slave Bootloader for Atmel AVR XMEGA]
  * [http://www.atmel.com/Images/doc8437.pdf Atmel AVR1622: TWI Boot Loader for XMEGA]
  * [http://www.dl5neg.de/bootloader/bootloader.html A bootloader for the ATmega8 AVR microprocessor]
  * [http://docwiki.gumstix.org/Robostix_i2c_bootloader Robostix i2c bootloader]
  * [http://git.kopf-tisch.de/?p=twiboot Open-source(?) TWI bootloader for AVR]
  * [http://code.google.com/p/avr-xboot/ Google Code project]
  * [http://www.scienceprog.com/testing-avr-universal-bootloader-on-atmega128/ Testing AVR universal bootloader on Atmega128]





Add your content here.  Format your content with:
  * Text in *bold* or _italic_
  * Headings, paragraphs, and lists
  * Automatic links to other wiki pages